README.md, before:

# RunlogDB

Database to record parameters from NGS runs as they come off the machines. It consists of a Django app with a SQLite3 backend 
and a simple HTML/ Bootstrap frontend to be used for querying the data. Data is uploaded by a seperate Python script, main.py.  

Currently the only querying possible is a simple search function and a query to download a spreadsheet containing the data 
necessary for producing the monthly NGS KPIs (setup date and run date, split by pipeline). There is a lot of scope to develop 
new features for the frontend.  

This database was a project for my STP Computing for Clinical Scientists (SBI101) rotation.

## Parameters

The database is split into three tables:
- **Runlog table**: data common to all sequencing runs, regardless of instrument type.
  - Run ID, worksheet ID, panels, sample IDs
  - Setup and run dates
  - QC metrics - interops and sensitivity data
  - Other data pulled from the samplesheet
- **Miseq/Hiseq/Nextseq tables**: data specific to the relevent instrument.
  - Specific data about the sequencer settings 
  - Pulled from the RunParameters.xml file

## Setup
- Copy over whole directory
- Create conda ennvironment from yaml file
  - ```conda env create -f runlogdb-env.yml```
  - activate the new environment - ```source activate runlogdb-env```
  - check that environment installed correctly - ```conda list```
- create new database - ```python manage.py migrate```
- change filepaths to point to this database
  - ```scripts/add_to_db.py```
  - ```scripts/print.sh```
- change filepaths to point to main.py
  - ```scripts/add_run.sh```
  - ```scripts/add_nipt.sh```
  - ```scripts/add_archive.sh```
- run add_archive to add all previous runs
  - some runs will throw errors, see file for details
- add commands in ```scripts/cron.sh``` to cron job to find and add any further runs as they are made
- TO DO: host frontend on cluster usign apache

### Directory structure
```bash
                                        FUNCTION
RunlogDB
|-- runlog
|   |-- db                              
|   |-- runlog
|   |-- manage.py
|   |-- runlogdb.sqlite3                database
|-- scripts
|   |-- __pycache__
|   |-- add_archive.sh                  Add previous runs
|   |-- add_nipt.sh                     Search for new NIPT runs and add
|   |-- add_run.sh                      Add a single run
|   |-- add_to_db.py                    called by main.py to upload a whole run
|   |-- cron.sh                         commands to add to cron job
|   |-- parse_interop.py                parses interops data
|   |-- parse_runinfo.py                parses runinfo file
|   |-- parse_runparameters.py          parses runparameter file
|   |-- parse_samplesheet.py            parses samplesheet
|   |-- print.sh                        print database to bash terminal
|-- main.py                             calls all of the parsing and add functions to collect and add data 
|-- README.md
|-- runlog_upload_log.txt               log of all uploads to check for errors
|-- runlogdb-env.yml                    use to recreate conda environment
```

## Potential upload errors
There are some common errors when uploading a run to the database, they are shown below.
Most commly it is either the samplesheet has been setup incorrectly or the run failed, 
meaning that the required files aren't present.

- ERROR 1: run failed/ not organised in usual way
```bash
ERROR  Could not open file /data/archive/miseq/161215_M00766_0104_000000000-AVB1R/RunInfo.xml
```

- ERROR 2: no interops files - either failed run or different folder layout
```bash
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/main.py", line 59, in <module>
    parse_interop.parse(run_folder, interop_dict)
  File "/state/partition1/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/scripts/parse_interop.py", line 13, in parse
    dictionary["Cluster density"] = round(summary.at(0).at(0).density().mean() / 1000, 2)
  File "/share/apps/anaconda2/envs/runlogdb-env/lib/python3.6/site-packages/interop/py_interop_summary.py", line 483, in at
    return _py_interop_summary.run_summary_at(self, n)
interop.py_interop_metrics.index_out_of_bounds_exception: Read index exceeds read count - 0 >= 0
/io/./interop/model/summary/run_summary.h::operator[] (181)
```

- ERROR 3: trailing comma missing from [header] section of sample sheet
```bash
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/main.py", line 45, in <module>
    parse_samplesheet.parse1(run_folder, samplesheet_dict, value)
  File "/state/partition1/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/scripts/parse_samplesheet.py", line 30, in parse1
    content = row[1]
IndexError: list index out of range
```

- ERROR 4: trailing commas missing in sample sheet [data] table
```bash
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/main.py", line 49, in <module>
    parse_samplesheet.parse2(run_folder, samplesheet_dict, "Pipeline", "Description")
  File "/state/partition1/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/scripts/parse_samplesheet.py", line 78, in parse2
    var_list.append(row[start_col])
IndexError: list index out of range
```

Commit message:

Added section describing how to run the upload scripts

README.md, after:

# RunlogDB

Database to record parameters from NGS runs as they come off the machines. It consists of a Django app with a SQLite3 backend 
and a simple HTML/ Bootstrap frontend to be used for querying the data. Data is uploaded by a seperate Python script, main.py.  

Currently the only querying possible is a simple search function and a query to download a spreadsheet containing the data 
necessary for producing the monthly NGS KPIs (setup date and run date, split by pipeline). There is a lot of scope to develop 
new features for the frontend.  

This database was a project for my STP Computing for Clinical Scientists (SBI101) rotation.

## Parameters

The database is split into three tables:
- **Runlog table**: data common to all sequencing runs, regardless of instrument type.
  - Run ID, worksheet ID, panels, sample IDs
  - Setup and run dates
  - QC metrics - interops and sensitivity data
  - Other data pulled from the samplesheet
- **Miseq/Hiseq/Nextseq tables**: data specific to the relevent instrument.
  - Specific data about the sequencer settings 
  - Pulled from the RunParameters.xml file

## Setup
- Copy over whole directory
- Create conda ennvironment from yaml file
  - ```conda env create -f runlogdb-env.yml```
  - activate the new environment - ```source activate runlogdb-env```
  - check that environment installed correctly - ```conda list```
- create new database - ```python manage.py migrate```
- change filepaths to point to this database
  - ```scripts/add_to_db.py```
  - ```scripts/print.sh```
- change filepaths to point to main.py
  - ```scripts/add_run.sh```
  - ```scripts/add_nipt.sh```
  - ```scripts/add_archive.sh```
- run add_archive to add all previous runs
  - some runs will throw errors, see file for details
- add commands in ```scripts/cron.sh``` to cron job to find and add any further runs as they are made
- TO DO: host frontend on cluster usign apache

### Directory structure
```bash
                                        FUNCTION
RunlogDB
|-- runlog
|   |-- db                              
|   |-- runlog
|   |-- manage.py
|   |-- runlogdb.sqlite3                database
|-- scripts
|   |-- __pycache__
|   |-- add_archive.sh                  Add previous runs
|   |-- add_nipt.sh                     Search for new NIPT runs and add
|   |-- add_run.sh                      Add a single run
|   |-- add_to_db.py                    called by main.py to upload a whole run
|   |-- cron.sh                         commands to add to cron job
|   |-- parse_interop.py                parses interops data
|   |-- parse_runinfo.py                parses runinfo file
|   |-- parse_runparameters.py          parses runparameter file
|   |-- parse_samplesheet.py            parses samplesheet
|   |-- print.sh                        print database to bash terminal
|-- main.py                             calls all of the parsing and add functions to collect and add data 
|-- README.md
|-- runlog_upload_log.txt               log of all uploads to check for errors
|-- runlogdb-env.yml                    use to recreate conda environment
```

## Adding a run

### Any run except NIPT
`bash /data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/scripts/add_run.sh /data/archive/<instrument>/<run_id> >> runlog_upload_log.txt 2>&1`
Bash the add_run.sh script with the path to the raw files, the last bit is to add to a text log file, I hadn't worked out how to make python do logging when I wrote this.

### NIPT
`bash /data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/scripts/add_nipt.sh >> runlog_upload_log.txt 2>&1`
NIPT runs are on a different server so the upload process is different, there is no need to input the run ID, the script will calculate the last run to be added and add all runs since then.

## Potential upload errors
There are some common errors when uploading a run to the database, they are shown below.
Most commly it is either the samplesheet has been setup incorrectly or the run failed, 
meaning that the required files aren't present.

- ERROR 1: run failed/ not organised in usual way
```bash
ERROR  Could not open file /data/archive/miseq/161215_M00766_0104_000000000-AVB1R/RunInfo.xml
```

- ERROR 2: no interops files - either failed run or different folder layout
```bash
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/main.py", line 59, in <module>
    parse_interop.parse(run_folder, interop_dict)
  File "/state/partition1/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/scripts/parse_interop.py", line 13, in parse
    dictionary["Cluster density"] = round(summary.at(0).at(0).density().mean() / 1000, 2)
  File "/share/apps/anaconda2/envs/runlogdb-env/lib/python3.6/site-packages/interop/py_interop_summary.py", line 483, in at
    return _py_interop_summary.run_summary_at(self, n)
interop.py_interop_metrics.index_out_of_bounds_exception: Read index exceeds read count - 0 >= 0
/io/./interop/model/summary/run_summary.h::operator[] (181)
```

- ERROR 3: trailing comma missing from [header] section of sample sheet
```bash
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/main.py", line 45, in <module>
    parse_samplesheet.parse1(run_folder, samplesheet_dict, value)
  File "/state/partition1/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/scripts/parse_samplesheet.py", line 30, in parse1
    content = row[1]
IndexError: list index out of range
```

- ERROR 4: trailing commas missing in sample sheet [data] table
```bash
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/main.py", line 49, in <module>
    parse_samplesheet.parse2(run_folder, samplesheet_dict, "Pipeline", "Description")
  File "/state/partition1/data/diagnostics/apps/RunlogDB/scripts/parse_samplesheet.py", line 78, in parse2
    var_list.append(row[start_col])
IndexError: list index out of range
```
